When a student is identified for WRS instruction, administer the Wilson Assessment

of Decoding and Encoding® (WADE, 2018) as a pretest prior to instruction to obtain ‘4

a baseline and to determine a student's placement and potential pacing through ee WEE

the initial WRS Steps (see the section to follow on Student Initiation, Meet with Your wiser ecermer of

student and Do the WADE). Alternative WADE forms are also provided to use as scodingandencoans

benchmark assessments and for reporting on student learning outcomes in relation
to progress through the WRS curriculum.

PREPARATION ee

coal
— aaa Wilson Language Training recommends its specific
P11 = training so that the Wilson Reading System® program is
gg~ Ct a Ss ' properly implemented (see the Quality Professional
: : — |g / | beaming section at the beginning of this manual). We
a . ny! also suggest that you work 1:1 with a student before
is) implementing WRS in a group setting, and, if possible,
aa a that you observe lessons taught by WRS certified
—s- an
= Sen teachers.
= | y =
BR To get started, we also recommend the following:

1. Join the Wilson Academy? Intensive Learning Community (see the inside cover of this manual).

2. Become familiar with teacher and student materials for Steps 1-6.

3. Read the Introduction section of this manual to gain an overall understanding of the concepts taught in the first
three Steps. Skim these Steps in this manual while looking at the corresponding Student Readers and Dictation
Book for Steps 1-6.

4, Meet with each student's parent(s) or guardian(s) (as appropriate) and then with your student individually to
explain WRS to them (see the section on Student Initiation that follows), Administer the Wilson® Assessment
of Decoding and Encoding (WADE) and select a starting point, either Substep 1.1 or Substep 1.3, according to
the student’s normed assessments and WADE results (see Student Initiation, Where to Begin and Your Initial
Lessons).

©1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL 31
