Use your own words to deliver a message similar to the ones below.

"You know many words by sight, but it is impossible to memorize all the words in our language! Many

words you don't know, and right now you can only guess at them.”

“Words follow a reliable system, and once you know this system you will be able to figure out new words

easily. You need to learn this system in detail so you won't have to guess at new words, and we will do

that with this program, which is a thorough study of word structure.”

“Words in English are comprised of sounds. Letters represent sounds.” (Show the student the Letter-

Sound Cards). “These sounds are combined into word parts called syllables.”

“You are going to learn the sounds and syllables. There are only six kinds of syllables. You will learn these

gradually until you know all of them. We will start with several sounds and the first type of syllable. At

the end of the 12 Steps, you will be able to figure out almost any word that you see.”
The student may ask how long the program will take. Say that you can't honestly tell. It varies, depending upon many
factors: attendance, past knowledge, what else is happening in the student's life, the independent work outside of
class, degree of language difficulty, etc. Most students complete the program in two to three years. However, from
the first weeks in a WRS class, students should be making continual (and noticeable) progress with their word-level
skills as well as their application with controlled text.
Where to Begin and Your Initial Lessons
All students begin WRS in Step 1 because the program cumulatively and thoroughly teaches total word structure,
omitting no concepts. Also, Step 1 establishes the standard lesson procedures, important terminology (such
as consonants, vowels, digraphs, base word, suffixes), and the alphabetic principle. It also begins phoneme
segmentation and manipulation, including tapping for decoding and encoding, That said, pacing through Step 1
(and all Steps for that matter) will vary greatly. Some students can fly through the first Step, whereas others might
be in Step 1 for weeks, or in rare cases, even months.
In WRS, there are 12 Steps that are further broken down into Substeps: 1.1, 1.2, 1.3, 1.4, etc. There are only two places
to begin WRS instruction: Substep 1.1 or Substep 1.3. The WADE results will assist in determining whether you begin
in Substep 1.1 or Substep 1.3, and it will also indicate pacing through the initial Steps.
Substep 1.1: Begin here with students who do not know the consonant sounds, nonreaders, and students reading
below grade two level. You will move very slowly with these students,
Substep 1.3: Most students begin in Substep 1.3. Begin here with students who are weak in decoding and/or spelling
but havea total reading score at grade two level or above, as long as they know most of the consonant sounds (even
if they do not know the short vowel sounds). Students who begin in Substep 1.3 will vary greatly in their pacing.

54 Wilson Reading System® {© 1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
