*
Lesson Plan Overview
Do caconwilladdace,) CONDUCTING AN Errective Lesson
This ection will address: | —a SSS
ACRE Ais ahi bok:
s cays ERASER ul It will take time to develop ease with your WRS lessons. This is important so
Pa SARS Tc | that you can readily strike a balance between high expectations and challenge,
2) SER - she and a student's ability to meet that challenge. Students must not become
8S Lesson Plan Outline * Ra either overwhelmed by expectations beyond their reach or bored by a slow
7 introduction of concepts (VanDeWeghe, 2009).
we Serer ala
Awe : Ser ingawarmth,humof-and’ o lessons. Let students know
yo WRS follows routines that allow the greatest efficiency ofinstruction. Start your
a atts lesson on time. There is so much that is done in every lesson, and every minute
csr re} Ke of the lesson is important. Losing even five min toalarge
hw ile loss of instruction.
0 a Each WRS lesson has 10 Parts and moves at a quick pace with constant
~ oy 0% ce interaction between the teacher and student. From one Part to the next,
— Qu sku “Students practice the same skills but in a different way. The word structure that
Fork N is taught for decoding in Block 1 of the lesson is then taught for encoding in
_ Com Block 2 and further practiced in Block 3.
eee
Block 1: Word Study/Foundational Reading Skills
Lesson Plan Parts 1-5
Phonemic Awareness, Decoding, Vocabulary, High Frequency Word Reading, Single-
Word Accuracy/Automaticity, Phrasing/Prosody, Fluency and Comprehension at the
Sentence Level
———
Block 2: Spelling/Foundational Writing Skills
Lesson Plan Parts 6-8
Phonemic Segmentation, Encoding, English Spelling Rules, High Frequency
Word Spelling, Vocabulary, Concept Mark up, Sentence-Level Punctuation and
Proofreading
ioe
Block 3; Fluency /Comprehension
Lesson Plan Parts 9-10
Vocabulary, Listening/Silent and Oral Reading Fluency and Comprehension,
Narrative and Informational Text
ll
66 Wilson Reading System? (© 1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORR ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
