STUDENT MASTERY AND PROGRESSION FROM SuBSTEP TO SUBSTEP
“Every man knows that in his work he does best and accomplishes most when he has attained a
proficiency that enables him to work intuitively.” - Albert Einstein

The Wilson Reading System® is made up of small, sequenced “building blocks” of instruction—each necessary for a
student to master. It is an intensive program organized into 12 Steps, divided into substeps, each teaching new word
structure and building upon previously learned concepts (see Word Study Appendix: WRS Scope and Sequence of
the Word Study Skills Steps 1-6 and 7-12).
For a new teacher of multisensory structured language instruction, correct pacing through the program is one of
the most difficult aspects to learn. It is essential to work in a substep until it becomes easy for the student to read
and spell the words. Explain this to your students. Tell them that you want to be sure they can almost do it in their
sleep. They may be anxious to move ahead, but the Upper Steps (Steps 7-12) will not be attainable without mastery
of each Step, which depends upon the mastery of each substep.
Only move to the next substep when the student masters the current one. This means that the student can
automatically read the real and nonsense words in the substep. It is okay if a student periodically gets "stuck" ona
word and must tap it out in order to decode it. However, this must only happen once in a while. Tapping is a useful
tool, but the goal is for students to read fluently without tapping.
Although the pace of advancement will vary throughout the program, all substeps will require multiple lessons, first
to master real words and then to master nonsense words (if provided). Some substeps will require several lessons
with real words and several lessons with nonsense words. Students also vary in the amount of time needed to
master a substep, and some substeps will be easier to master than others.

To progress from one substep to the next, use the following guidelines:

+ Charting at least 15/15 (real) and then 13/15 (nonsense) words, reading most words with automaticity—no-

tapping (see Part 4 of the Lesson Part Procedure section).

+ Self-correcting for a reading or spelling error with teacher questioning and assistance.

+ Independently spell with at least 75% accuracy.

+ Understanding/mastery of concept taught, including the “marking of words" as directed.

+ Fluent reading of the substep controlled text (sentences and stories).

Note: In this manual, in each substep, you will see that new concepts are taught during Introductory and Ongoing
Lessons, and then additional concepts are added in Subsequent Lessons. There may be a few students in the early
elementary grades who will struggle with the difficulty of the complex word element instruction presented in
Subsequent Lessons. In this case, you may need to progress to the next substep omitting the complex word element.
instruction at that time. These concepts can be taught later to the student after the student completes Steps 1-6
during the review of the first six Steps.

\ © 199, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRSINSTRUCTORMANUAL 57
