For students starting in Substep 1.3 who know very few words other than those they know by sight,
use real words initially and provide ample practice for accuracy with sound tapping. When the real
words are read and spelled with automaticity, without tapping, introduce the substep nonsense
words. Mastery of decoding accuracy and then automaticity will likely take significant time, and
therefore, you will move slowly through Step 1, with multiple lessons in each substep.
With students starting at Substep 1.3 who easily recognize real words, you will move as quickly as
possible through Steps 1 & 2. If students can automatically read and spell words in each substep,
teach them the word structure and then practice with nonsense words to ensure that they can
blend and segment the sounds. Some of these students will need to thoroughly work on both real
and nonsense words, while others can mainly focus on the nonsense words in Steps 1 & 2. Often u
these students have memorized many words by sight so be sure to work on breaking established
guessing habits in the first two WRS Steps.
The initial lessons with a student are so important! Students must move somewhat slowly at first as it is essential to
set a firm foundation. It is critical to set a secure base. Even if the student seems to have little problem reading and
spelling words in Step 1 and Step 2, do not move too quickly. There are many foundational concepts to master and
if you go too fast, these will not be secure. Students need to practice some tapping (segmenting of sounds) even if
they can read; it is critical that they also become good at segmenting the sounds for spelling. However, with older
students who can read and spell Step 1 words, be sure to focus on the accuracy and automaticity of nonsense words,
moving through Step 1 as soon as procedures and concepts are mastered. You need to find a balance between
proceeding too slowly and going too quickly. Experience will answer this question best!
Explain that an important aspect of the program is substantial practice for each new concept. It is more important
to master each Step than to hurry through it. At the beginning of the program, be sure to establish the good habits
that you will need for success. Students must begin:
+ Breaking the guessing habit and using skills (tapping, notebook, keywords)
+ Reading independently (silently) before reading orally
+ Reading fluently and accurately with penciling as needed
+ Breaking down words to spell rather than trying to spell from memory
+ Spelling orally before writing, and then again when writing
+ Writing as neatly as possible
+ Proofreading independently after writing a word or a sentence
+ Retelling stories in sequence using visualization
(©1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL 55
