INTENSITY AND PACING THROUGH THE STEPS
The amount of time needed to adequately work on the skills developed in all three Blocks will vary from student
to student and group to group. The more impaired the student, the more time that will be needed. Many variables
have to be considered to answer the question, "How long will it take for my student to reach the ultimate goal?”
Most often, an answer is only an educated guess. However, the three primary factors to consider are:
1, Student's age and how far behind the student is in reading achievement
2. Student's cognitive profile
3. Intensity of instruction: class size, as well as frequency and duration of the scheduled WRS class
Throughout the years, many WRS students who have phonological coding deficits but adequate orthographic
memory and high oral comprehension skills have achieved their goals with two to three one-hour 1:1 lessons per
week. Depending upon how far behind students are when they begin WRS, they might be able to read and spell
independently in one to two years.
On the other hand, students who have significant word-level deficits with a complicated cognitive profile will
benefit from (and need) a more intensive schedule. Examples of a more complicated profile include students with
dyslexia and additional weaknesses, particularly in the following areas: rapid naming skill, orthographic memory,
working memory and other executive functions, vocabulary, and oral comprehension. These students need more
instruction and significantly more time for Block 3 work. For these students, WRS classes will be their key to reading
and writing for several years. Ideally, in a group, they should be scheduled five days per week for 90 minutes; and in
a 1:1 setting, three days a week for 90 minutes or four to five days a week for 60 minutes. Depending upon how far
behind these students are when they begin and the frequency and intensity of their lessons, it will likely take two
or more years to complete WRS Steps 1-6, and two or more additional years to complete WRS Steps 7-12. However,
this varies from student to student.

‘©1909, 1996,2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL a7
