Students should be encouraged to write throughout the program. From the beginning, journal writing is very
appropriate. Formal writing instruction should follow the principles of instruction previously described. Initially,
students do oral retellings and summarization of passages read in Block 3 of the lesson. With progression through
the Steps, this can transition into written summaries with a gradual release to students. Additionally, when graphic
organizers are introduced in Block 3, these can be used to systematically teach informational writing. Students should
be held accountable for the spelling and correction of any taught word structure or any taught high frequency word
(using reference tools, including their Student Notebooks). However, they should not be held accountable for the
proofreading and correction of any untaught patterns.
To reinforce skills, you can assign homework, as appropriate. WRS students often require significant amounts of
direct instruction with current concepts in order to apply skills independently. Incorrect procedures can quickly
become habits, so to avoid this, be sure to provide enough direct instruction with all new concepts before assigning
independent work. Consider assignments that will reinforce previously taught skills to decrease the chance that
the students will head in the wrong direction with current concepts. Homework options include wordlist charting
pages to scoop/mark, and sentence pages and passages (controlled or non-controlled as appropriate) to practice
penciling and fluency. Students can do simple illustrations to prepare for retelling and to reinforce comprehension.
You can also send home flash card packets (phonetically regular or high frequency words) to practice and you can
assign WRS Student Workbook pages that correspond to the student's current substep.
Since most parents are unfamiliar with WRS lesson techniques and procedures, and frequently do not have an
understanding of the structure of the English language as we teach it, do not place expectations on them to reinforce
concepts. Instead, consider suggesting that the parents read to their child. Explain that students who are unable
to read miss out on vocabulary and concept knowledge and that reading to them is critical to develop these skills.
Ideally, they could read something that is above the student's independent reading level, but within the student's
listening comprehension abilities. The parent should not ask the child to “try to read” some of the book or to take
a turn with the text. Explain the high value of this (as enjoyment, not instruction) as doing so will expose the child
to richer vocabulary and more complex sentence structure than the child would be able to access independently.
Be sure to teach to mastery and then help students apply and generalize their skills as they progress through
the Steps. When you do this, students completing Steps 1-6 will be well on their way to proficiency. Depending
‘on the student, grade-level achievement will not occur until they work through the Upper Steps, when you will
gradually increase the level of controlled and non-controlled text difficulty. Some students, especially those with
poor processing speed and orthographic memory, will likely continue to lag behind in fluency. However, with your
instruction, they will be able to improve their skills enough to read independently. Since it will take time for your
students to be able to independently work at their grade level, in the meantime, assistive technology, including
screen-reading software, e-books, and products designed to support note taking, can be very important additional
factors for success. Remember that independence takes time, but can be achieved!
©1909, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL a
