.

Getting Underway

as Lacon wth wblledaes STUDENT IDENTIFICATION AND PRETESTING

x Se i «| Students should have an evaluation of their foundational reading and spelling

: SOR NSS skills to identify those students who would be appropriately placed in WRS.

| + Preparation "|The Word Identification and Spelling Test (WIST; Wilson & Felton, 2004) can be

|» stu pee ©] included for this purpose. In addition, other normed reading assessments can

bee administered if the WIST is not available or in addition to the WIST. Low
scores on subtests measuring word identification, word attack, and spelling
indicate that a student has not mastered foundational skills, and therefore, will
benefit from the Wilson Reading System’.
Due to their lack of reading fluency, children with poor word-level skills most
often also score below expected levels on reading comprehension subtests.
Some of these students would demonstrate weak reading comprehension
even if their word-level skills were intact because of attentional problems, and/
or weaknesses in working memory, vocabulary, and oral language/listening
comprehension abilities. Assessment results can help you determine these
things, and thus, guide your WRS instruction and pacing.
Ideally, students (especially individuals with dyslexia) should have a more
comprehensive evaluation, which is helpful in providing appropriate WRS
instruction and pacing. The goal of a comprehensive assessment is to examine
patterns of academic strengths and weaknesses and identify underlying
cognitive traits. (See General Appendix: Reading Acquisition and Cognitive
and Environmental Factors, and Identification of Reading Disabilities: Building
a Comprehensive Assessment.)

! Some students have adequate phonological awareness and alphabetic
knowledge but have weak rapid naming/processing speed and/or poor
orthographic memory. As a result, they have difficulty with reading fluency
and comprehension. Since WRS develops a student's orthographic processing
and automaticity of word reading while simultaneously working on fluency
and comprehension, it is an appropriate intervention for these students as well.
Lastly, students who have significant difficulties with phonological awareness,
working memory, and rapid naming are often the most severely impaired in
reading (Morris et al, 1998). These students are definitely appropriate for a
more intensive implementation of the Wilson Reading System®, especially in
the hands of a well-trained and experienced WRS instructor.

50 Wilson Reading System? © 1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORR ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
