Summative AssessMENT

In addition to the summative end-of-step assessments described earlier, the Wilson? Assessment of Decoding and

Encoding (WADE) is administered as a posttest at the end of a school year or at the end of instruction to evaluate

mastery of the curriculum.

A substep mastery score is determined, which indicates whether the student is achieving independent decoding
and spelling with the word structures taught thus far. Although the student should demonstrate growth with this
controlled word structure, it takes time for this progress to generalize and lead to improvement on norm-referenced

reading tests, which do not have controlled text. Some students may need to complete Steps 1-6 before significant

reading and spelling progress can be documented by norm-referenced testing. However, progress should be clearly
evident on the WADE if a student is responding to the program. See the WADE manual for guidelines regarding

mastery scores and program progress.

ACHIEVING READING AND WriTING PRoricIENCcY

Students must practice reading and spelling in order to become proficient. Students need to read, read, read, and
students need to write, write, write.

Initially, many of your students will have limited success reading non-controlled text beyond the WRS sentences and
passages. Fluency with controlled text is essential. Therefore, throughout the first six Steps of the program, students
should read and reread the WRS wordlists, sentences, and passages and other available controlled texts until fluency
is achieved. As students progress in the program, you must also introduce non-controlled and enriched text when
they can be read with your support. From the beginning, students should also listen to good literature as well as
informational text. Thus, teachers must read to students from grade- and age-appropriate enriched sources.

Hours and hours of reading practice must occur in order for the student to achieve greater and greater fluency. The
student should read with someone who is familiar with WRS, since that person will be able to guide the student with
questioning techniques if an unknown word contains taught elements. The person will also know how to "feed"
the student any words with untaught elements. For example, if the word potential appears in the text when the
student is in Step 5, note that the first two syllables contain elements that have been taught but that the last syllable
(tial) contains an element that will be taught in a future Step. First, help the student determine the word from its
decodable part or from context. However, if the student is unable to determine the word, do not try to teach tial-
simply provide the word.
Formal instruction in spelling should be limited to the controlled and high frequency words in WRS along with a
limited number of additional sight words. These could include words such as the name of the student's school or
other highly relevant words. Other words to be memorized, such as a weekly list, are not effective and will merely
frustrate students. Students with dyslexia should not be given random words to memorize for spelling.

60 Wilson Reading Systeme (© 1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORR ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
