STUDENT INITIATION
Meet With Your Student and Do the WADE
Meet with your student to explain why you will be using WRS and
to administer the WADE. Explain that: Students” .with significant word-level
. A deficits cannot function at the literacy
+ You are going to systematically teach the ways to figure out levels expected of them on a daily basis,
words so that they don't all need to be memorized anymore. This problem,is often accompanied by
ish i ; heightened stress, behavior.and social
+ English is based on a sound system in which 44 sounds are put Beis ‘a lack of motivation, and low
together to make thousands and thousands of words. Most self-esteem ° (Alexander-Passe, 2008;
people think of English as a jumbled mix of words formed Daniel et al., 2006).
without rhyme or reason, but there is a system to it, and the It is essential to. approach all of. your
majority of words in English follow that system. ipocic, (especialy oldies ones? is
pane o aoa positive, upbeat manner. They have likely
+ English is logical, but it isn’t usually taught that way. experienced so much failure that they do
+ They will learn more about English than most people know 53 Believe they cam leariy
and this will help them tremendously with both reading and
spelling.
It’s hard to imagine the feelings students have when facing undecodable words on a page. Most do not believe
they can improve, so they are hesitant to show interest. Expect this and do not feel thwarted. Students protect their
self-esteem by resisting instruction. Reading instruction has failed them in the past; why should this be different?
With older students, share that abundant research now indicates that many people have the same difficulty
mastering the sound system of English, and this type of instruction has been proven to make the mastery of it
possible.
Next, explain that you are going to periodically administer the WADE to help both you and the student know what
to focus on and how the pacing might work, This will take a little longer the first time you do the WADE because it
is setting a baseline. No matter the results, explain that all students begin in Step 1 because they will learn concepts
that are important for subsequent Steps, and each Step must become automatic for them. This is because each Step
builds on the previous one.
Then, administer the WADE and immediately provide feedback regarding some sounds and syllable types that they
had difficulty with that you will be teaching them. Use the WADE manual for directions to administer the test and
for guidelines to determine placement and potential pacing through the initial WRS Steps.
Lastly, show the student the 10-part WRS Lesson Plan outline and describe the big picture of each Block. Show the
student the deck of Letter-Sound Cards. Do not be apologetic for these! Make it clear that these sounds are the
core of the English language and that they combine to construct thousands of words that will be mastered for both
teading and spelling.
‘©1989, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP, ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. 'WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL 53
