.
Progression Through WRS
(Fhiesection willaddlengunnn) Formative Assessment
late Ue eerie SH) Formative assessments have a very positive influence on student
| + Student Mastery and | learning (Ainsworth & Viegut, 2015; Hattie, 2012).
‘Substep t 9 SU: step - 5 | Formative assessments are quick checks of student understanding and
| Student Mastery and | application. They provide immediate feedback for both the teacher and
SaiBrogiestion ort | ‘students. The teacher can adjust instruction accordingly, and students can self-
| SteptoStep regulate their learning (Ainsworth & Viegut, 2015; Hattie, 2012).
| + Summative sscesSITieti Formative Assessment is built into the WRS program with each lesson,
shieving Reading especially in Part 4 (Wordlist Reading), Part 8 (Written Work Dictation), and Part
nd Writing Proficiency J 9 (Controlled Text Passage Reading) of the lesson. During the lesson, you will
assess how the student is responding to instruction, that is, how the student's
understanding of concepts and application of skills are progressing. The
errors identified during the lesson help to pinpoint trouble spots and patterns
of errors, and subsequent lessons will be based entirely upon the student's
understanding and application of concepts and skills taught in the current
lesson. You will always discuss patterns of errors with students and target these
together. Tell students that you are going to “go after” these challenges, and
for that reason, the words that you will include for reading and spelling will
contain the specific areas of difficulty.
You will track word-level reading accuracy by maintaining a progress chart for
FA each student. After you chart a student's reading of a wordlist (see Part 4 of the
® Lesson Part Procedures section that follows), you will immediately review any
§ errors, use questioning to lead to their correction, and discuss any pattern of
ea ‘ errors. Ifa student made errors on several words with e and i vowels, you would
iy discuss this with the student and plan your subsequent lessons to practice
i wit Se words with these vowels sounds, making the student aware of the focus.
. eae Bg In the Lesson Planning & Execution section that follows, you will learn how to
ty coas me plan and deliver each part of the WRS lesson. Throughout the entire lesson, you
. aia: 5 4 ; will concurrently teach and assess a student's understanding and application
ele) Ge eee. of skills, and provide immediate feedback to the student to help develop self-
; av ae “ s : “|. ..monitoring and reading and writing skills.
