Questioning for Concept Reinforcement and Error Correction —_
You will weave questions throughout the lesson in order to reinforce current and review concepts, A Ricend
be metacognitive about word structure, and assistin errr correction. In the Step Instruction section of this manual,

directions are provided to teach and then follow up with additional word examples and questions to help the
student solidify understanding of the new concepts. You will then weave questions throughout the lesson and in
subsequent lessons for further reinforcement.
For example, to teach the difference between a blend and a digraph:

+ Use Sound Cards in Part 2 of the lesson.

+ Explain the difference between them: Consonants

S68 SSOR- ie aN
iS “ 7
+ Make new word examples (slip, ship, etc.).
so cl ak berry (
ss righ “a Khe | Lar Lledek
oe ( on eads = 2 sounds jhe
: 4
The ach he ues ei ce # ueofre son Weave the questioning throughout the
lesson. Note: weave—do not overkill! Weave review questions as well as current ones. In each substep, you will find
i i init it concepts being introduced. ‘3

suggestions for questions pertaining to the current concepts being introduc ay Qed gue Lagan

itis important to avoid word retrieval questions, such as {what isthiscalled 24 (pointing to te blend). Students with
dyslexia often have significant word-retrieval difficulty. These questions usually will be frustrating and make it seem

as though they are not learning, when indeed they are learning but have trouble recalling the specific word. Instead

of a word-retrieval ae a will ask questions similar to the ones in the example above. Raiananat

in addition to questioning for reinforcement of skills, use questioning for error correction, During a lesson, expect
students to make errors. Due to the “controlled text” used in WRS, you can use questioning techniques to lead a
student to make corrections, Do not tell the student the word when misread, unless it contains untaught elements,

Qt lao et ™ Vee pads
nn RAINING CORP ALLNGHTS RESRVED- WRSINSTRUCTORMANUAL 67
