Block 1; Parts 1 through 5 |

Teachers use Letter-Sound Cards, High Frequency Word Cards, Word Element & Syllable Cards (as appropriate), anda Student Reader

to plan and execute Parts 1-5 of the lesson. |

1 Sounds Quick Drill: This is a quick drill of the phonemes with the teacher showing a Letter-Sound Card and the student
naming the letter(s) and corresponding sound(s). Keywords are always used with vowels and, as needed, with other
sounds

2. Teach & Review Concepts for Reading: Letter-Sound Cards are used to teach phoneme segmentation and blending
(initially), Students are taught to segment sounds using a finger tapping procedure. Beyond Step 2, Word Element &
Syllable Cards are also used to teach total word structure. Every lesson involves this manipulation of cards to teach word
structure and practice decoding,

3 Word Cards: Skills learned in Part 2 of the lesson are applied to reading single words as flashcards. Review words are
included in the stack of Word Cards presented and vocabulary words are discussed and reviewed. Unknown high frequency
words are taught and practiced with a separate set of cards.

4 Wordlist Reading: Decoding skills are applied to the reading of real words, and subsequently nonsense words, on a
controlled wordlist in the Student Reader containing only those elements of word structure taught thus far. In 1:1 lessons,
the student is charted daily with a list of 15 words to track independent success. In group lessons, students are charted
before progressing to the next substep. The wordlist changes with each lesson so that students never memorize the list.

5 Sentence Reading: Current and previously taught skills are applied to reading words within sentences. All sentences
contain only the elements of word structure and high frequency words taught thus far. Fluency and comprehension is
emphasized and students learn to phrase the sentences into meaningful chunks using a penciling technique.

Block 2: Parts 6 through 8

Teachers use the Dictation Book to plan Parts 6-8 of the lesson. As appropriate, teachers use Word Element & Syllable Cards during

the lesson. Students use the Magnetic Journal and Letter Tiles during the lesson for Parts 6 and 7, and a dictation page (copied and

in the Student Notebook) for Part 8.

6 Quick Drill in Reverse: Every lesson includes a phoneme drill with the teacher saying a sound and the student identifying
the corresponding Letter(s) Tiles. Only taught phonemes are dictated.

7 Teach & Review Concepts for Spelling: Students spell words using manipulatives to sequence sounds, syllables, and
word parts. Initially, and always with one-syllable words, students spell words with Letter Tiles. Students apply the finger
tapping procedure to segment sounds for spelling. Beyond Step 3, students use Syllable and Affix Cards.

8 Written Work Dictation: The teacher dictates sounds, high frequency word phrases, words, and sentences that are
controlled, containing only the word structure elements directly taught thus far. The student repeats each dictation prior
to writing, Sounds and words are spelled orally before they are written. Words are “marked up" by the student as directed.
A formal procedure is followed for independent sentence proofreading.

Block 3; Parts 9 and 10

A Student Reader is used in Part 9 and varied texts are selected for Part 10 of the lesson.

9 Controlled Text Passage Reading: The student silently reads a short passage in the Student Reader with controlled
vocabulary containing only the studied word elements. The student retells the passage using own words linked to
visualization of the passage. The student then reads the passage orally.

10 Listening/Reading Fluency and Comprehension: Initially, the teacher reads enriched text to the student, The student
Uses visualization and retelling to develop comprehension skills at a higher level than current word identification skills.
As the student progresses in the program, the student reads non-controlled, and eventually, enriched text for fluency and
comprehension instruction.

‘©7909, 1996, 2018 WILSON LANGUAGE TRAINING CORP. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. WRS INSTRUCTOR MANUAL 3
